Remember how we noted a couple of things down on our To Do List a check for later we said that we check
for a pension problem in our regression.
And the problem that we were concerned about was called multi code linearity.
The reason was that we had some high correlations between our features.
So multicore linearity was something that we wanted to test formally.
Now put simply multicore linearity is when two or more predictor variables in a regression are highly
related to one another.
In that case they do not provide unique or independent information to the model and the consequences
of multicore linearity are as follows.
There is a loss of reliability in the estimates of the effects for the individual features.
In particular the features that are affected.
In other words there is a high variability in the coefficient estimates for small changes in the model
for example adding or removing a feature can have dramatic effects.
The estimates of our theta values in our model become unstable and can even switch signs from positive
to negative and vice versa.
The third effect of the problem is that the findings are strange or misleading or don't make sense.
These are the main symptoms of the multicolored reality problem.
Now given these symptoms we can definitely say that on the third one our regression definitely passed
because we did a sense check on the signs of our coefficients and we found that the coefficients definitely
had the right signs.
They made sense from a logical perspective.
Like more rooms increased the property prices and more pollution decreased the property prices for example.
But in this lesson I want to show you how you can do a formal check how you can look at a metric to
tell you whether you have this problem or not.
The formal check that we will do is by looking at a statistic called the variance inflation factor or
V i f and the second thing that we will do is we will monitor it if moving a feature causes a dramatic
change in our theta parameters but that will wait until the next lesson.
Now let's go back to Jupiter notebook and add a new section heading this section heading is gonna be
called testing for multi calling parity testing for multi colony parity and to test for multicore linearity
we said we're gonna be using a statistic called the variance inflation factor.
So let me quickly explain how the variance inflation factor does its job because this statistic is a
measure of core linearity Among the features within a multiple regression and what it will do is it
will spit out a number that quantifies the severity of multicore linearity so in effect we get a number
similar to how we get a number with the p values and we can look at this number and compare it to a
threshold is it above the threshold or is it below the threshold.
That's how it's gonna work.
But before we write the python code to actually calculate the variance inflation factors let's add some
formulas in late notation to the section heading to kind of better understand what's going on.
I'm going to show you how the variance inflation factor is calculated for one of the features.
As an example the first thing that will happen is that a regression will be run on that feature.
Let's say we're looking at our tax features.
So what will happen is that we will look to explain the tax values as a linear combination of all the
other features in the data set.
So you're gonna get a regression that read something like tax equals and then some intercept see Alpha
underscore zero plus some parameter times the number of rooms.
So Alpha underscore one arm plus some other parameter Alpha and it's got two times the next feature
say nitrous oxide plus and so on till you get to ls that which will be Alpha on a school.
Curly braces twelve.
Else that since we have 13 features total and we're looking to explain tax on property prices.
We're left with 12 different kind of parameters in front of the other features.
I've also used alphas here in my latex notation so we don't get confused with the theta parameters that
we used earlier.
Now this is only step one of calculating the variance inflation factor.
Step 2 looks like this in step 2 we get the variance inflation factor for our tax feature.
So V.F. under school tax and braces.
It's gonna be equal to backslash F R A C curly braces one over curly braces parentheses one minus r
underscore curly braces tax curly braces Kari 2 closing parenthesis closing curly brace let me quickly
delete this backslash here we don't need that and hit shift enter to make this a little more clear this
is step 2 in Step 1 a regression is being run of all the other features against tax and in step 2 the
r squared of that regression is used to calculate the variance inflation factor so 1 divided by one
minus the r squared of this regression up top is the variance inflation factor for the tax feature so
that our squared here is the OSC word from trying to explain the tax feature in terms of all the other
features in the dataset so the point I'm trying to make is that we can calculate a variance inflation
factor for all the different features right just by swapping out this tax for R.M. we get the variance
inflation factor for our N so in our pipeline code what we're gonna do is when we calculate 13 different
variants inflation factors now the stats models module actually makes this very very easy We're not
gonna have to run this like two step calculation manually we simply call a function but I wanted to
show you what's going on behind the scenes in the latest notation nonetheless.
So let's scroll to the top of our notebook and actually import this functionality and I come in here
and I'm going to write from stats models dot stats dot outliers underscore influence import variance
on the score inflation and the score factor.
Some importing this specific function from stats models start stats thought outliers on the score influence.
Now let me hit shift enter on the cell.
Interestingly the deprecation pointing disappeared when I did that and I want to scroll back down and
now I'm actually going to call this function.
Check it out.
Variance on the score inflation and the score factor parentheses.
And before I put any arguments between these two parentheses I would hit shift tab on my keyboard to
bring up the quick documentation on this function.
What we see here is that we need two inputs Zog and eg ZOG underscore index and this little plus sign
here.
Scroll down a little bit and we can see that the first argument is an n dimensional array.
And the second argument is simply an integer.
It's a whole number and that number is basically the column of this and dimensional array that we want
to look at.
All right.
So we've got a data frame X underscore including constants and say we want to calculate the variance
inflation factor for the first column in this data frame.
How would we do it.
Well I mean come down here.
And as an argument passin the first one which was X org is equal to X on a score include on the score
a constant comma and then X ARG underscore index idea X is equal to say 1.
Why did I pick index 1 and not 0.
Well at index 0 we've got our intercept are constant.
I'm interested in our first feature which is crime.
Okay so I hit shift enter on this and you're going to see that it doesn't work.
Take a look.
We get a type error scrolling down we see that the error description is uninhabitable type slice.
Why did we get this the error message is actually fairly cryptic and hash table type but we do discovered
that it actually has to do something with data types again and how data types actually usually quite
hidden in python.
But occasionally if you ignore them too much they come and bite you when you're not careful.
Remember how when we hit shift tab here and we looked at what kind of argument this exotic argument
should be.
We found out that it was an n dimensional array.
Well let's look at the type of x underscore including underscore constant.
So writing type parentheses x on a score include on a score constant and hitting shift and will tell
us that this is not an n dimensional array.
This is in fact a data frame a panda's data frame.
So how do we get a n dimensional array an NDE array from a data frame pandas fortunately has a solution
for us.
All we have to do is called he values attribute so all we have to do is put a dot after it and use the
values attribute this retrieves an n dimensional array from our data frame and just to prove that it
works.
When I hit shift enter and print out the value one point seven one point seven is the variance inflation
factor for our crime feature.
Nice but how do we calculate the variance inflation factors for all the other features to do that.
We're gonna use a loop we will need to loop across all the columns in the data frame.
But suppose you don't know how many columns there are in your data frame.
So as a challenge can you output the number of columns in X underscore include underscore constant bonus
points if you can do it in two ways.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video ready.
Here's the solution.
The first way you can find out how many columns there are in the data frame are using the length function
and you would use the length function on the index of columns.
So as an argument you would pass in the data frame and then put a dot after it and write columns and
this will give you the number 14.
The second way you can do this is by using the shape attribute.
So writing the name of the data frame and using dot shape will give you the number of rows and the number
of columns.
So there's four hundred and four rows and 14 columns to access the number of columns directly use the
square brackets and then a one to return the second element from the shape attributes tuple.
There we go.
So both of these lines of Python code work as a way of retrieving the number of columns in a data frame.
How.
We said we have to write a loop.
Right.
So as a second challenge can you write a for loop that prints out all the variance inflation factors
on all the features.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and try this out.
Ready.
Here's the solution.
You write for I in range and the range would be the number of columns in the data frame so I could have
X underscore clued in it's got constant dot shape and then 1 and then colon and then in the body of
my for loop I have a print statement with a function call 2 variance inflation factor so variance inflation
and this growth factor parentheses.
And then my first argument is going to be as before X on the score include underscore constant dot values
comma ZOG on a score.
Index Ida x equals.
And then what now let's apply the iterator of the loop and that's I.
There we go.
That's it.
That's the solution.
So when the loop finishes we can print all done and let's run it see what we get to the.
These are all the variance inflation factors calculated for every single feature in our data frame.
How printing all this stuff out is very well and good but what if we wanted to store it in a list.
What if we wanted to store all these things in a variable.
So when I copy the code I have above.
Come on here add a few more cells pasted in the lead.
My challenge comment.
Delete this print statement and then I'm going to create an empty list here V.F. equals square brackets
put a comment here.
This is an empty list and then inside my list I'm going to use the append method.
So VHF don't append and what will it append will append the variance inflation factor that is calculated
as part of the loop and when we're all done we can print our variance inflation factor list.
Let's see what we get.
So that worked really well.
We get all the same results printed out as before except now we're storing them in a variable.
But I tell you what I'm going to show you a different kind of Python syntax to accomplish the same thing.
So I'm going to copy this pasted in here.
What do we do now is I'm going to run this loop inside these square brackets and the way I would do
this is I would move this part here which is the body of the loop.
If you think about it and then afterwards I will add the code for the loop namely this part so I can
copy that pasted in here and note the square bracket at the end.
Then I'm going to delete this part here and I will split this one line over two lines sticking into
here.
That way you can see a lot better what's going on.
Mm hmm.
Let me run this just to prove that it works.
Here you go.
So this is interesting right.
We're used to seeing loops like this but you could also use this syntax here to run the loop inside
the square brackets to populate your list.
Now I don't really like this formatting here so I'm going to write some code to add a data frame at
the end using the dictionary notation again.
And this dictionary is gonna have queef on the school name colon and then the names are going to be
from my training dataset X underscore include underscore constant double columns.
So this is gonna be my list of names and whatever comma had to enter to go down to a new line for my
second column in my data frame I'll have VII F as the column name and then I'll put the variants inflation
factor list that we've calculated using our loop right afterwards.
Now let's see what we get we get something like this.
We get the feature names here and we get the variance inflation factor for each feature next to it.
How there's a lot of numbers after the decimal point with the variance inflation factor.
So let's round it and then we use a rounding function from num pi and p dot around parentheses have
the variance inflation factor inside for the first argument and for the second argument I want to put
two as how many numbers I want after the decimal point.
So 1 2 numbers after the decimal point I'll put a closing parentheses here and at shift enter to refresh
myself.
And this is where we get how the variance inflation factors are a lot easier to read.
So how do we interpret this output.
Well similar to how we did things with the p value we compare these numbers to a threshold and for the
variance inflation factors the scientific consensus seems to be that the threshold is around 10 meaning
any feature that has a VHF over 10 would be considered problematic and would need closer inspection.
But looking at our list here we can see that all the numbers are below 10 and this suggests that we
don't have to worry about multicore linearity.
Now some academics are a little bit more conservative regarding their threshold and they think that
a cutoff of 5 is better.
But given the fact that our results for the coefficients make a lot of sense and we are below the threshold
of 10 for the variance inflation factor I'm really not too worried about having a multi calling linearity
parity problem now.
As I've discussed earlier this housing dataset actually came from a research paper where two academics
were looking for the demand for clean air in Boston.
They were trying to put a value to how much people are willing to pay to live somewhere with good air
quality.
And I was curious if these two academics tested for multicore linearity as well.
And if they mentioned it in their paper and what I found was that they indeed discussed this problem
in the article's footnotes.
The problem that the researchers faced was a little different from us because the researchers were actually
trying to estimate the value of having clean air and what they had was more than one measure of pollution.
For us in our data set we have one variable energy x which measures nitric oxide But originally this
wasn't the only pollution factor that was tested in this research paper.
They actually had two different pollution measures and what they found was they actually had a multi
cleaning pretty problem when they included both of them.
In other words one of the pollution features was redundant and they ended up removing it from their
regression model.
So I think this is actually quite an interesting solution to the problem.
If you're encountering it in your own research removing an unnecessary feature is a perfectly valid
way to modify the model and it's something we're going to look at in the next lesson because in the
next lesson we're going to be making small tweaks to our regression model and try and simplify it and
at the same time we get a chance to check for that final symptom of multicolored reality namely seeing
if our coefficient estimates change dramatically when we tweak the model.
Now it's getting late over here hand I really need to get another coffee but I've had so much coffee
already so I think we'll have to maybe dilute my coffee with decaf.
That should work right.
Anyhow how see in the next lesson.